Dear fellow practitioners,
our arrogant mind
creates many
obstacles and causes us much suffering. This very arrogance
kills
our success. Today, in this
regular Dharma sharing session,
we will learn the Buddha's teachings on how to
subdue
this arrogant mind, a method of thinking to subdue
arrogance.
Now, I invite you all to join hands and recite the Buddha's name, praying for blessings:
Namo
Buddha
Shakyamuni, Namo Buddha Shakyamuni, Namo Buddha
Shakyamuni.
Dear fellow practitioners, it is true that the
Buddha taught us to be well-versed in
learning and understanding in order to practice the Dharma, to practice
without
error, and to be diligent.
Today, I, the Buddha, would like to
share with you the Parable of Brahma Holding a
Torch, from the Dhammapada.
The mind reflects on the Pure Land, and I ask to read the
ancient scriptures. At the
Pure Land Monastery, in the land of the Buddha, there was a
wise and intelligent Brahmin who was well-versed in
many scriptures and understood everything. Because of this,
he became arrogant and conceited, believing himself to be unmatched.
He traveled everywhere seeking someone to
debate with, but no one dared.
One day, in broad daylight, he carried a torch
into the city. People were surprised and
asked him why he was carrying a torch during the day. The
Brahmin replied, "Everyone in the world is
foolish and blind, unable to see anything.
Therefore, I carry a torch to illuminate their path. I have
searched everywhere but found no one who
dares to debate with me." He was
very arrogant, very conceited.
Therefore, an arrogant person
will surely engage in
ridiculous and uncontrollable actions, right?
Through this scripture,
we must understand that an arrogant person
will gradually be
led astray by their own arrogant mind,
causing them to act in ways
unlike anyone else. It is very ridiculous, but...
But the arrogant person is very confident
in
their wrong actions. (Contemplation of the
Buddha's teachings continues.) The Buddha knew that the Brahmin
had good karma from a previous life and could be saved. However,
if he was arrogant and self-centered, seeking
fame and fortune, not considering
impermanence, and relying on himself to look down on others, he would be
condemned to hell for countless eons, with little hope of
escape. Dear fellow practitioners, we
see that the arrogant mind has great karmic consequences.
The arrogant mind often
looks down on others, and the karmic consequence of this contempt is that he
will be condemned to
hell. The Buddha said that he
would be condemned to hell for countless eons, with little hope of
escape. That is the danger of the arrogant mind. (Contemplation of the Buddha's teachings
continues.) The
Buddha then transformed into a wise man
sitting in the marketplace, called the Brahmin over, and asked
why he did that. The Brahmin replied, "
Because everyone is ignorant and cannot see the light day and night,
so I carry a torch to illuminate
their path." The wise man then said, "The scriptures
mention four enlightened principles. Have you heard of them?" The Brahmin replied, "
I have not heard
of them."  He said the four principles were as
follows: First, understanding astronomy, geography,
and the harmony of the four
seasons; second, understanding the stars and the
movement of the five elements; third, mastering the art of governing the country and ensuring the
people
's well-being; and fourth, mastering the art of military command and national defense. Did Brahma, upon hearing this, possess mastery of these four principles? Brahma, upon hearing this, felt deeply ashamed, threw down his torch, and left, respectfully clasping his hands, secretly acknowledging his own shortcomings. Reverend Dharma Friends, our Buddha
is skillful and expedient,
therefore, according to the karmic conditions of sentient beings, He teaches the Dharma accordingly.
This Brahma, however, was arrogant because he believed he possessed
all worldly knowledge.
Therefore, the Buddha used
worldly knowledge to question him. The knowledge
considered to be worldly for someone
is understanding astronomy, geography, and the
harmony of the four seasons.
This is someone who understands the weather, is knowledgeable in astronomy and geography,
and understands the harmony of the four
seasons. That is, this person is skilled in
observing and knowing the changes in weather
through perception from heaven and earth,
and understands all of these things. That
is one  One thing a truly capable person in the
world needs to
know is, secondly, understanding the stars
and the movement of the five elements. This belongs
to astrologers, meaning they
can observe external signs,
from the stars or something else, to predict the fate of the nation and the king.
They have this field of study. This means they
can discern
external signals, whether the country is about to face
war
or peace, when a king's reign
will end, who will succeed him, and
where that successor will lead the country. Isn't that impressive, my esteemed friend? Very impressive. Thirdly,
mastering the art of governing and ensuring the well-being of the people.
This
belongs to the realm of kings,
right? To govern and ensure the well-being of the people, a king
must know the things that a
good king does. They know how to govern and ensure the well-being of the people.
Fourthly, mastering the art of military command and defense.
This is what makes a
good general; knowing how to command troops
and protect the country. Only a person in
the world who knows these four things is truly exceptional.
Because he was considered so capable, the Buddha manifested
a Sage to question this Mr. Pham
Chi.
After hearing this,
Mr. Pham Chi realized he lacked the
ability and admitted he was not
skilled. Dear fellow practitioners,
understanding the universe, the
harmony of the four seasons, the
stars, and the movement of the five elements—is
this related to Buddhist teachings? Yes, it is.
Because in Buddhism,
we should remember a saying the Buddha
taught: "All phenomena in the universe are created by the mind." Therefore, the
minds of sentient beings create the
events and phenomena in this world.
Those who become
kings have their power and prestige accumulated
from past lives,
surpassing their accumulated merit and making them the
greatest compared to
the people of the entire country, except for those who
practice self-cultivation and discard
fame and fortune. That is, the law of cause and effect is inherently like
that. In a country,
whoever currently holds the highest power has the greatest merit and
prestige.  They are the
greatest compared to those seeking fame and
fortune, while those who have renounced worldly life and become monks are not mentioned. They are
not mentioned because as monks, they do not seek
worldly or
heavenly blessings, so they do not use
their past life blessings for that purpose. They do not use their past life blessings either; their sole
purpose is to benefit
themselves, to seek Supreme Enlightenment, and to benefit sentient beings, to
help them attain enlightenment.
Therefore, they do not
compare their blessings with those of
the kings of the country.
Do you understand this point? If, at some point,
this king's blessings diminish and are
no longer sufficient to rule,
then there will be changes in the heavens. That is,
in the
celestial sphere of
Vietnam—I'm just giving an example—this is to illustrate that
before the change of leadership of the
country's rulers, there are
changes, and those
who understand the stars and the movement of the five
elements can detect whether this person will
be re-elected or not.  And
what will the person who wins be like? That's why,
in the past, people considered this very
accurate because they had studied
this subject, meaning they recognized the phenomenon through their
past experiences. And of course,
those who recognized it also
had some kind of spiritual practice in their previous lives; they
had some kind of spiritual practice and possessed some
supernatural powers, but they
didn't apply that power to the
benefit of liberation. That is, they didn't
practice to seek liberation, so they have
some karmic rewards in the human realm.
Remember, our Buddha, of
course, understood all
worldly and transcendental laws. It's
not that the Buddha didn't
know these things. The Buddha knew clearly;
the Buddha is called the king of kings, the
king of kings, so the Buddha
knew everything thoroughly
from beginning to end. But those who can
only see things in this way, and they
don't know how to help
others transform. For example,
this king is about to die.  The time has come when his good
fortune to be king is almost over.
Those who
understand the stars and the heavens only know
this much. But if it were the Buddha, he would
know this and could tell this
person how to change
this situation. However,
others don't know this
except for the Buddha and the Arhats. Only the
saints in Buddhism know this.
That's why we see
here that the Buddha teaches us,
ordinary people, how to eliminate arrogance
by realizing we are inferior to others, right? Let's
compare both sides.
First, as worldly people,
what can we do to be superior to others? If we just
walk around normally, like
building a straight wall, we
can't even do that, can we? But if
someone who can build a
straight wall goes and
manufactures a bolt or screw, they can't
do that either, can they?
Or if you ask someone who manufactures
bolts and screws to sing a song, they won't sing.  Isn't that right?
Therefore, we can easily find
our limitations
regarding worldly matters, and even
more so regarding the path to liberation.
Because we are ordinary beings,
not saints, right? Our minds are
constantly filled with deluded thoughts and impurities. Therefore, we
see that
we have nothing to be arrogant about. If
we were arrogant, we would be no different from
this Phạm Chí, wouldn't we? And we
know that
we are ignorant and ignorant, so let's not be even more ignorant and ignorant. Arrogance and contempt for
others will lead to countless lifetimes
in hell. If we are arrogant, boasting about our
talents and skills and belittling
others, the result after
this life will be countless lifetimes in hell.
Therefore, from worldly matters, we see our
shortcomings; from the path to liberation, we see
our shortcomings. Furthermore, thanks to our
extensive learning—that is, thanks to our studies and
knowledge—we
understand that an arrogant mind
will have painful consequences.
Therefore, having extensive learning will eliminate
all worries and anxieties.  The Buddha taught
that having extensive knowledge eliminates suffering because one
hears and understands it. Therefore,
one does not become arrogant. Arrogance also brings
much suffering, doesn't it? It also brings much pain. But then the
suffering ends because of the karmic consequences of arrogance.
If we are arrogant, we suffer
such karmic consequences. (Contemplation of the Pure Mind) Please
continue reading the
scriptures. The Buddha, knowing that the man's mind was pure, immediately
manifested his Buddha form, radiating brilliant light
throughout the earth and sky, and then recited a
verse: "If you
have little understanding and become arrogant and look down on others, it's like a blind man holding a torch while the sighted remain in darkness." This means the Buddha taught that if you have only a little understanding and become arrogant, thinking
yourself
superior and looking down on others, then you are
like a blind man
holding a torch. It's
like a blind man holding a
torch; if the torch illuminates the path, others gain
light and know the way, but
you remain in darkness. An
arrogant person, with a single arrogant thought,
leads to their own downfall.
The thought of arrogance is a
foolish and ignorant thought, isn't it? That's
why it's called darkness.
Therefore, we must practice the
Buddha's teachings, always
reflecting and seeing that we are still very
inadequate. However, this arrogance
has a limited scope, which
makes it difficult for us to reflect. For example, if
only three people are working together, then I think
I'm the best among them. That
's how arrogance arises, and I spend all
day only working with these three people.
So, I always see myself as
superior. Do you see the negative karma, dear fellow practitioners?
Because I only work with three
or four people, I always
see myself as superior, never as
inferior. That's why every day I see
myself as better than others, which is another reason for
increasing arrogance.
These are people who don't use
broad wisdom to observe. I'm good, but only good
within the chicken coop, right?
I'm just the strongest rooster in the
flock, the best in this flock,
not stronger than other flocks,
nor stronger than any other species. If I
meet a civet...  Running out of breath,
right, dear fellow practitioners? That's why
the mind-body contemplation wants us to
broaden our contemplation. We are always afflicted by negative karmic connections, thinking
we are the best in a
certain group. We always think
we are the best, and that's what causes suffering. Being good
in a group isn't enough; we must be the best of everyone, surpassing all others. Only then, when we
no longer consider ourselves the best, can we truly
reach that level of excellence.
That's the principle. If we
don't consider ourselves the best, then we reach
the level of the best.
If we still have the thought that we are the
best, each of those thoughts makes
us dumber. That is, we will be dumber than we are
now. Do you understand, dear fellow practitioners?
We must remember this
principle. Remember it from school.
If we don't remember this rule of cause and
effect, then we are truly blind, are
n't we?
If we still have the thought that
we are the best, then the very moment that thought of
being the best will make us
dumber than we are now. That is, the next thought that arises
will...  You'll become dumber compared to now, and
gradually you'll become completely stupid.
What could be dumber than that? Do you understand, esteemed friend?
That's the rule. It's not that just because you
think you're smart,
you'll be smart. This is a
rule of cause and effect. If our minds
are arrogant, we
'll have contempt, and if we have contempt, we
'll become stupid. So, those who think they're smart are actually stupid, aren't they? Those who despise others will be
despised in return. Because stupidity leads to contempt.
The cause and effect of arrogance and contempt
will eventually lead to someone else being arrogant and
contemptuous of you. You ca
n't escape karma. Therefore, it's
best to contemplate as the Buddha taught:
in the worldly realm, we are already
very stupid, and in the realm of transcendental teachings, the
conditions aren't yet
favorable for us to practice, are they?
Therefore, we should
always recognize our weaknesses and
recognize the good qualities of
others in a broader context.
That perspective
makes
us humble and appreciative of
others, and these two conditions always keep
us striving to
learn and improve. Some
people start off very
well, but gradually become less and less successful,
not understanding why.
This is because of
excessive pride, which leads to gradual decline
without knowing or being able to answer the
question. It's simply
pride in their success,
and this success is only
within a certain scope, not something that encompasses a large area, right?
Therefore, we need to cultivate
mindful contemplation,
always looking at
our limitations and shortcomings within the
broader scope of a field where we are
dominant. If we feel
we are very dominant in a
small group, we should look at it more broadly.
If this advantage and
excellence are within a
broader scope, are they still truly outstanding? If they are not
outstanding, then they are
very limited.
That very mindset will prevent
us from complaining or criticizing.
Humility, without contempt for anyone, allows us to
praise others, fostering a diligent and learning-oriented
spirit.
This will bring us benefits
in terms of cause and effect; we will
always develop. The arrogant mindset, however,
is very limiting in the present.
For example, if we are already skilled in a
particular field, in a particular job,
or within a particular group, and
someone
more skilled appears,
we will feel uncomfortable, push them away, and
in the present moment, we will
cause our group and
our work to decline, failing to
improve.
This is the immediate impact we experience.
If
we are already the best, we don't want anyone else
to surpass us, and therefore,
we have no opportunity to learn from
anyone else. This is a limitation
we must endure.  Such a karmic retribution is
very painful, isn't it? And of course,
the products we produce
will gradually decline because
we stop learning new things. Arrogant people
don't like to learn. Arrogant people
only like to talk about what they have and
don't want to learn from
others. Arrogant people have this
characteristic of arrogance, so they can
only develop to a certain level,
and we will see them
stagnate. That's what arrogance is like;
they will stagnate.
Not to mention the deep karmic consequences.
If they experience a karmic storm,
they will lose everything because of
this arrogance. Everything will fall apart because they
only develop within their own scope and
don't learn from anyone. Gradually,
their merit decreases, they start talking nonsense
and doing things incorrectly, and
their products will not be
as good as their previous products
because their merit has decreased. The
initial good products were due to
their merit.  At first, they weren't arrogant; it was still a certain level.
Gradually, it
decreased, and we see that
this person will
no longer be the same as before. Their
thinking becomes slow, their work becomes sluggish, and
their products and work results will be inferior.
Therefore, we need to deeply understand the karmic consequences
of
arrogance so that we can diligently practice a
way of thinking to subdue
this arrogant mind. Anyone who can subdue
arrogance will benefit greatly. So, when
we see the
manifestations of this mind, such as envy,
we know that this envy
arises from arrogance. Not being happy with
the good achievements of
others—we know that this is the beginning of arrogance.
Therefore, we should always accept
constructive feedback and learn from the
progress of others, so that
we can eliminate arrogance.
Another manifestation is that an
arrogant person...  There is no equality of opinion,
no equality of opinion.
Those who are less arrogant prefer
equality of opinion and have
more of it.
Arrogance is very dangerous. Talking
about hell is scary, but talking about
eliminating arrogance to avoid falling into
hell seems difficult to do diligently, does
n't it? But if you always think
about hell being above your head, you'll be scared
immediately. The only fear is not thinking about
hell, right? So,
let the arrogance control you. Remember
this, dear Dharma friends:
remember Mr. Pham
Tri. Mr. Pham Tri held a torch in broad daylight.
Remember that image, so whenever
we have arrogance arising,
we should remember
this story. (Contemplation of the torch) (
Continuing the sutra) After the
Buddha finished speaking the verses, he told Pham
Tri that no one was as foolish as him,
holding a torch in broad daylight.  Entering the great world,
his understanding was as small as a grain of
sand in the desert. That's the nature of the ordinary
mind of sentient beings.
His understanding was as small as a grain of
sand, yet he was still arrogant and conceited.
Hearing this, he felt ashamed, bowed his
head in reverence, and asked to become a disciple. The Buddha
accepted him as a monk. Thanks to his enlightened mind,
all delusive thoughts ceased, and his mind became tranquil.
He immediately attained Arhatship. He saw that
people with good roots easily abandon
such thoughts, but it's very difficult for us, is
n't it? We inherently only add,
not subtract. But practicing Buddhism requires subtracting,
not adding. We learn
Buddhism
to
reduce our thoughts, not adding
anything. But we often add
and refuse to subtract,
so we remain here forever,
unable to move,
even regressing. The mind is illuminated, and we,
along with our fellow practitioners, encourage each
other to discover
the source of our arrogant mind.
Truly, no one can help us;
only we can.  Only you yourself can
know the nature of your own arrogance;
no one else knows. No one else can help you, dear fellow practitioners.
Only you can help yourself
eliminate arrogance and
escape hell.
No one else can help you. There are people who can't even perform the
ritual of bowing to the Buddha with an iron head; they can't do it.
Why is that? Not understanding means you lack
extensive
knowledge, right? You haven't learned widely, you only cling to
your own knowledge and consider it correct,
so you stop learning.
Your arrogance
greatly limits your learning, preventing you from
achieving anything.
So remember, as long as you have
arrogance, it will limit you
greatly, not to mention the karmic consequences and suffering that
will come to you. Now, I respectfully ask the esteemed fellow
practitioners, if
anyone has any opinions, please raise your hand. I respectfully address the
head teacher and the
entire congregation. I have two
questions. First, regarding your lecture on
arrogance...
Regarding the idea of ​​looking down on others, I'm not yet clear on how to identify the egoistic mindset. For
example, if
someone, or I, successfully accomplish something
difficult that few people can do, and then
I feel very
happy and proud of myself for
having done it, would that be considered
egoistic? That's my
first point. My second question is,
if you taught us to
recognize our weaknesses and then
recognize the strengths of
others to eliminate egoistic tendencies, I'm
afraid that in some
cases, we might fall into the trap of
always seeing others as skilled and
then thinking we're not. This leads
to feelings of inferiority and a
reluctance to take on any task
because we feel we ca
n't complete it. You
taught us that we need to think about
how to avoid being arrogant, even if we're not.  I
will not fall into that
self-deprecating school of thought. I am deeply grateful for
your kindness, teacher.
Your question is very good, isn't it,
dear fellow practitioners? Dear fellow
practitioners, with many other shared insights, the Mind-Illuminating
Perfect Contemplation still tells you
this: When you successfully accomplish something,
you should be joyful, you should
feel great, but what is the purpose of this?
To accept what comes next, that's the
point, the point of
sharing, so that you know
you can do more. Therefore,
you should accept what comes next to
strive, to explore yourself, to
experience yourself, and to become
more diligent. So it must be
complete like that, not just a single idea, only
understanding one aspect, which leads to
confusion. That is, a shared idea
must be complete. And what about the part about looking at
your own weaknesses and looking at
others' strengths to improve yourself? Well, you've also cut
out one of the teacher's shared ideas, which is that she
said it's to transform the egoistic mind. That
is the...  This is what I'm doing
to transform my ego and arrogance. That is,
it has a purpose. It's about having the right intention, right?
This is to transform my ego and
arrogance, not to see myself as
weak. It's just to transform
my ego and strive to improve. If I only focused on my weaknesses and others' strengths,
cutting out one aspect—that's how I cultivate
humility—then I become self-conscious. So, when
learning, you have to learn all
the points, not just the
most important ones.
This is about transforming my ego and arrogance.
When I see
joy in myself, it begins to appear.
If I have a mindset that looks down on
others, I have to turn my mind
around. I see many weaknesses in myself,
and outside of
my scope, in
this job, there are many people who are very, very
talented. Therefore, I aim to
eliminate my ego and arrogance. So, when
we have a purpose to eliminate ego and arrogance...  Arrogance does
n't necessarily lead to self-doubt. But what about those of
us who can't do anything? We're
afraid of being laughed at or criticized for everything we do, so we
don't dare to do it – that's the true sign of self-
doubt. And here, we've already accomplished something,
and we've acknowledged
our achievements; we've already done the
best. But the only
way is to eliminate our arrogance
and push ourselves to diligently learn and
progress. Then we can't fall
into a state of self-doubt. Now, I'd like to ask for
the opinions of others. Yes, I
respectfully ask you, teacher. I have
a question. I
respectfully ask you to teach me how to
identify arrogance through daily thoughts and
actions. For
example, there might be times when
we are arrogant but don't realize
it. I respectfully ask for your guidance
on this. Thank you for
your kindness. Respectfully,
dear fellow practitioners, your question is very
insightful. Identifying arrogance through...
Our daily thoughts and actions—
that is, our arrogance—have an
object. If we only lived with a
mountain, or just with a tree, we
probably wouldn't ever be arrogant, right? But if we lived
surrounded by this mountain, this
tree, this dog, this cat, this
bird, this mouse,
we wouldn't ever have the feeling of arrogance,
right? Because those aren't
objects for us to showcase our
talents, right? Therefore, we would
n't be arrogant. For example, consider
this story: a person teaches a dog, and the
dog learns to speak and act
very well, but they can't be arrogant
towards the dog, thinking, "I'm better than the dog."
Right? They can't be arrogant like that.
They are only arrogant towards
others, thinking, "I taught the dog well," but the
object is another person,
not the dog,
right? So, if we want to
know if our mind is arrogant or not, we should
observe how we behave towards
those around us. At
first,
we act normally towards them.  But later, because
of a slight change in our behavior, we started treating them
differently than before.
We should observe how we behave
towards those around us. If
we know whether we are arrogant
or not, it doesn't matter. A
person who despises others will
speak without respect,
kindness, or
love, right? Our actions
will immediately reveal it. We know what kind of people we are, so
arrogance is very easy to
identify when we observe
our behavior towards those around us. Instead of increasing
respect, we decrease it.
We reduce our reverence for others.
Our minds know that we are being controlled by the karma of arrogance,
causing us to
diminish our virtue. Isn't that easy, my friends? It's
very easy, not difficult at all.
So, we can easily identify it. In our
interactions with
everyone, whether intelligent or
ignorant, we should only increase
our good intentions compared to them,
not decrease them.  When
kindness towards others diminishes virtue,
we are the ones suffering from
arrogance. Oh, we are truly
arrogant, my esteemed friends, do you understand? It's
very easy to recognize.
Namo Buddha Shakyamuni. I respectfully ask you, teacher, I
have a question about
arrogance, about how to deal with arrogance
in a more specific way.
First, for example, regarding
people we see as less capable than ourselves,
how can we not only
avoid arrogance and contempt,
but also respect and cherish them?
That's the first point. Second,
regarding people who are more capable than us,
for example, if
we can learn
from
someone who is
more capable than
us, how can we
avoid envying
them? And how can we still cherish and
respect them? That's all my question.
Thank you, teacher, your question is very good.
Otherwise, dear fellow practitioners,
we are sitting here, but
we also realize that we need to
see ourselves as insignificant because we
cannot ask the same questions as
you have, right? Right here, we see that
we
cannot ask such questions.
Because those who ask questions are those who are
progressing, aren't they? Right here, we
see that around us there are
many people worthy of respect, aren't there? The
Heart-Mind-Returning Enlightenment
asks: Regarding those who are less capable than ourselves,
how can we not look down on them but instead
show them respect? Let us cultivate
a mindset where we never
look down on anyone. For those
less capable than ourselves,
we should guide them because
they are our fields of merit,
right? By guiding them,
we gain merit. If everyone were more capable
than us, who would we have to teach?
Where would the merit come from? Isn't that worthy of
respect? No, it's very worthy of respect.
Therefore, we cannot say that they are
inferior to us. Why is that? Because what
we are doing is due to
ourselves.  They may have learned some things, but the things they
don't know are simply because they haven't learned them yet,
or even if they have learned them, they still can't grasp them. It's the same with
us; there are
many things we can learn but still
can't grasp. For example, the practice of mindfulness and mindfulness. If you tell us to go to
medical school and learn how to use a syringe to give injections, we
can't learn it
because we already know it. Besides, if we try to
inject someone, we might have a reaction, and
we know that if we try hard,
we can only do it when someone tells us, "If you inject this, that person will live." If you inject someone and they die, we might be able to do it, but normally,
if you tell us to inject something,
we wouldn't dare. So, aren't those
things we can't learn? It's
no different from things that people with
mental disabilities can't learn. If we ca
n't learn something, we find something else to teach. There's
no one who can't learn
anything, right? Like those people
with mental disabilities. At least they can learn something, it's just that they
learn slowly. For example, you could say...
They remember after one time, and they remember after two times. If you scold them, they
'll remember. At most, you'll hit them, and they'll still
follow the same action. So
they have a learning ability, right? It's
just that we... We feel like we ca
n't learn, so we give up, because
we're not as well-behaved as those with superior intelligence, right? Therefore, we still have a lot to
learn. With this,
we'll never be arrogant. We'll always
be in the practice of generosity. If we
see someone less capable than ourselves, we must
wholeheartedly guide and help them
do the job. A person with
such generosity will never be arrogant,
right? If we didn't have someone above us to guide us, we know where we'd be by now, right? So much we've learned is from those who taught us, right? It's from those around us who
taught us, not from
ourselves. From the moment we're born,
from the womb, we only
know one thing from a
previous life: to babble, right? And
then we call out, "Dad! Mom!"  Then, everything
we know—this cup, this
piece of paper—is something we learned,
right? So, no one is
without the ability to learn, but it depends on their
circumstances and capacity to receive it.
Therefore, whenever we have the opportunity,
we must use all our abilities
to teach whoever needs it, and accumulate some merit, right?
That's how they use their merit to benefit
us.
That's for those less capable than us.
But what about those more capable than us? If we
can't learn from their skills, how can we avoid
the envy and jealousy we feel
towards
them? Now, the mind of the Perfect Contemplation gives you,
dear fellow practitioners, a very
pleasant contemplation. For example, when you go out to buy a plane ticket
and see the plane, and you get to
sit on it, is
n't that great? How happy are the
inventors of that plane? How
happy are the pilots?
If you're annoyed with them, just get
off the plane and
walk. So, we see
that we are close to people who are more capable than
us, and we can learn in some way.  I also benefit,
right? I benefit, but now, if I'm the
only one around me who knows how to do something, and
nobody else knows how to do anything, I'll
starve. I don't know how to plow, I do
n't know how to cultivate, I don't
know how to water, I
don't even know how to plant vegetables, right? If
I'm the best and everyone else is dumber than
me, I'll starve first, right?
So, what we desire
is to have many people better than us
so we can benefit from them, right? Because if
everyone is dumber than us,
we'll just be the leader, right? We'll be constantly
ordering everyone around, and then
we'll get annoyed and suffer. It's like being a student of
the wise, better than being a teacher of the fool,
right? And let's not even talk about being
stupid, you know. You can teach the stupid, but
you can't teach
yourself. And if you're envious of those who are
better than you, then you're teaching yourself, right? That's so foolish. And if you look down
on those who are less capable than you, that's so foolish. It's
so foolish
because you have no place to create merit, and you're
envious of those who are better than you.  So, we
don't know how to enjoy the benefits, right? They're
better than us. They teach us, or if
we don't learn, we
benefit, right? For example, if we're near
someone who knows how to arrange flowers, at least we
can admire them even if we don't know how, is
n't that better? Not knowing how to arrange flowers is like being able to admire them; admiring flowers makes our souls happy, right? That's better than being with an incompetent person who arranges flowers for us that look lifeless. If we don't know how to do it, and we meet
someone equally clueless, neither of us
gets
any product, and looking at it makes us angry,
right? So, isn't being around someone skilled still better and happier? That's why
we have to think about our own benefit, and
then we'll feel comfortable. Because
people don't know the practical benefits for
themselves: being near skilled people means
learning from them, and
benefiting from them, while being near incompetent people means
receiving handouts. That is, we benefit from being with anyone, but
naturally, we push them away
and only like incompetent people.  If we are more than others, we will
die, remember that? Therefore,
I also
hope for the truth: to be around both
intelligent and unintelligent people, remember? Because
if I only hope to be around
unintelligent people, I will die, right?
I will die first. And if I only stay with
intelligent people, I won't
have that good fortune, right? I won't have that good fortune;
I will create karma, and because of that, I
will have to encounter
many unintelligent people, right? We understand
karma like that, so
we must know our karma and how to live
in the
present moment and apply the Buddha's teachings to
transform our karma.
Transforming karma is simply
transforming the mind. Your question is very
good.
Respectfully, to the Venerable Master and all the
congregation, I have a question I would like to ask for your
explanation so that
we can understand. Does it mean that if someone
talks a lot about themselves and
their accomplishments, is that considered
arrogance? Yes, that's all.
Respectfully, to the esteemed Dharma Friends.  The Buddha was the
one who talked most about
himself and his accomplishments,
wasn't he? If the Buddha hadn't spoken
about those things, we wouldn't be practicing Buddhism.
But we need to learn from the mindset with which he spoke.
The Buddha
revealed his past mistakes
so that others wouldn't fall into them, and he spoke
about his current successes
and guided others to achieve them.
That's the Buddha's way of speaking.
An arrogant person, on the other hand, only talks about
their achievements and doesn't
guide others on how to
achieve them. An arrogant person only speaks to belittle and
insult others, right? That's how they look down on others.
But when you talk about
your achievements with sharing and
encouragement, that's the way the Buddha and
the saints spoke.
Do you understand, dear fellow practitioners? That's also the way of speaking.
If the Buddha hadn't spoken at all about
his successes, about the
hardships
he overcame in his past lives and in this life,
no one would learn from him.  No
one studies Buddhism without learning from it,
so we must learn how to speak, we must
learn from the Buddha. Once we have learned from the Buddha, we
won't be afraid of making mistakes. So we
must tell those who come after us, when they
encounter laziness or
lack of diligence, that we should say, "
Before, I also had to work hard like
this, I had to work hard like this, I did this,
I tried this hard,
and in the end, the result was like
this." Should we say that? Yes, we should say it,
but not just say it and leave it at that. We must
guide and
encourage them to follow, instructing them wholeheartedly.
Our hearts must be kind,
wishing for everyone's
success. Therefore, the Buddha has a
saying that we need to learn from him: "
I am a Buddha who has attained enlightenment, you are Buddhas who will
attain enlightenment." This is a great encouragement and equality,
and we must do the same. If
you can do this, I can do it too, and I
hope I might even be more excellent than you. Just
do it, teacher, be more excellent!
That saying is wonderful, isn't it?
That saying is what we should learn.  The Buddha's teachings
and those words will inspire people
and bring joy,
right? But instead of teaching
people from beginning to end, you only teach them wrongly.
For example, when cooking rice, you should teach
people that step one is choosing the rice, step
two is washing the rice, step three is choosing the rice, step
four is adding water, and step five is putting it on the
stove and cooking it. You don't teach them like
that. Instead, you tell them to wash the
rice for you without knowing why. Then they
take the rice out and ask, "What kind of rice is
this? Is this rice edible?" and exchange it for something else.
That's how people just
follow your instructions, they don't learn
anything, and they'll
never become skilled. That kind of
teaching is arrogant. Do you understand this? That kind of teaching is arrogant, not
wise. A wise
person teaches by
supporting and helping others to
succeed. That's the way a wise person teaches.
We must learn this way
because the Buddha taught us to let go of each
thought, to contemplate and think little by little.
But what is the purpose of this? To
become a Buddha, we must apply it,
we must guide and share it
equally with others in all
these teachings. The Buddha was very egalitarian
with us, teaching us little by little, helping us understand little by little. He taught us to
understand little by little, and
then we could do it. But the way of
teaching is not to teach people
incorrectly, then when they make mistakes, you
scold them, and that's how, day by day,
the ego grows, right?
So we must know how to
teach in a way that allows our minds to
gradually progress to the Buddha-mind. The
only way is to study Buddhism, my dear fellow
practitioners. We cannot
create anything. A disciple of the Buddha has this kind of
happiness, my dear fellow practitioners: We
don't have to think about anything else.
That happiness is not about thinking about anything else, but only about
how to practice the
Buddha's teachings correctly, not about creating
anything else.  The
Buddha's disciples are very, very carefree. We are
blessed by the Buddha; it took
him three countless eons to find this, right?
We are now enjoying this great life, are
n't we? The Buddha's children are called rich,
rich children. We are very
rich, so he found it for
us. We just need to find ways to spend
this wealth, right? The seven treasures are
faith, modesty, shame, generosity, and wisdom.
We are the most blessed.
Our father gave us seven treasures; we just need to
eat, drink, play, sleep, and rest within those seven
treasures. Don't go beyond them, right?
Don't think about anything else.
Thinking about it will lead to death, right? Or poisoning?
We should be careful not to think about
things that will cause us death.
So we don't need to think about it. When
we study Buddhism, we only need to memorize
what the Buddha
taught and follow what the Buddha taught. That's all; we
don't need to think about anything else. If
we see something in our thoughts that is
not in accordance with the Buddha's teachings,
we must abandon it. Dear fellow practitioners, if you agree, you must
abandon it.
Dear fellow practitioners,
today's sharing session is very
meaningful thanks to the
many valuable contributions from you all. And one
more thing... I respectfully ask the teacher and
all the congregation:
If
we are currently working with someone who is arrogant and contemptuous,
and who doesn't teach us properly,
how can we transform
that karma? I respectfully request your guidance. [Applause
] That's
a good question, but it's also
difficult to answer. The good thing is that it's difficult to
answer. If we are currently working
with someone who is arrogant and we have
n't learned anything from that arrogance,
how can we transform it? It's
very difficult. So,
firstly, we must ignore
their arrogance.
We don't have to be infected by everything, do we? It's
like a doctor
treating a patient;
they have to find a way to avoid the
patient's "infection."  Protecting ourselves is the right approach, is
n't it? The first thing
is to
ensure our minds aren't tainted or
troubled by the arrogance
of others. Arrogance is accompanied
by contempt and
inappropriate words, right? Then
we should ignore and not accept anything
people say about
us. We shouldn't accept anything
that's said wrong about us
because we've already made that
decision. That means we need
a protective shield to fight against
harmful viruses. To
make it easier to understand, let's say that. So we don't let
people look down on us and then later, when
we do well,
we become infected. If we do
n't get infected, then
we should focus on our work and the
quality of our
work. That means focusing on actions and
not words. When
we set the goal of focusing on actions and
not words, we will
have a way of behaving and speaking that makes them act in a way that compels
them to act.  The right
action is to achieve good results
in work. No matter what you say, if
someone insults you, you laugh, and if
they insult you again, you sing.
That is, ultimately, you
set a goal for success in your
work, so your behavior is
n't limited. Do you understand this point, Venerable Master?
No, it's not limited. Of
course, difficult tasks are perhaps due to some
vow or high level of cultivation,
so there's a connection. That's also
a good thing; it's not that
you're suffering from karmic retribution. If you were,
you would have already clashed, right? If
someone has karmic retribution, there will be
conflict, but since there hasn't been
conflict yet, it means you have a karmic connection,
understand? One is due to a vow, the other is that you
have a karmic connection with
them. So now you can still endure, you can
tolerate, you can tolerate well.
This
is how we achieve
enlightenment, because
no one achieves enlightenment with favorable circumstances; they
only achieve enlightenment with
unfavorable circumstances. How do we transform
things?  If we can resolve dissatisfaction and make it disappear, then
that person is truly
progressing on the path. But if we are
dissatisfied ourselves first, then that person is falling into depravity,
meaning they
are descending. Do you understand? For example, if we encounter
someone arrogant and we look down on them and
say the same things
as them, what do we call that? Being
dissolved? That's arrogance, that's being dissolved.
Therefore, we must remember that achieving
enlightenment is the most
crucial thing. Even lay people must cultivate
merit and a good heart. Only with a good heart can we
have merit. So, what we face is
not important;
how our mind reacts to that situation is what
matters, right? That's what's
important. The Buddha attained Buddhahood by
conquering all the defilements and
afflictions in his mind, not by
conquering anyone outside,
right? And all the saints
fought and conquered their own defiled minds; it
has nothing to do with
others.
Furthermore, because others commit evil,
we don't necessarily have to commit evil ourselves.
Remember that. Do you understand?
Others committing evil is their business; we don't have to
commit evil just because others do. That means we
don't depend on the evil intentions
of others, and
evil doesn't depend on others.
That
's
the way for us to think and
live in this world. We don't necessarily have to let
our minds be harmed by
evil actions from the outside. We shouldn't
harm
our own minds. It seems like a difficult problem to solve, but it's easy to
solve, just difficult to put into practice, right? It's
very easy to solve in your thinking,
but with practice, you get used to it, and it becomes familiar to your
mind. Uncle Hoan told a story to the
audience: when Uncle Hoan's mind begins to
go about its duties, that is,
how can a husband agree? You have to have a plan
beforehand, meaning that when you get
home, you have to know what's going to
happen, understand? So when you get to the
gate, as soon as you see it, you have to
greet it loudly, "Hey, what are you doing?" You have to
anticipate it and change people's minds
first. For example, if someone curses and they
say, "Don't..."  When you hear that, just listen to the
story and the analogies, but don't stop. After
hearing a few analogies, you'll stop. Of course,
you can't continue
the story, so you'll naturally have to
return to your own story,
right? That means you have to take control of the situation. You have to
use your own good intentions
to inspire good intentions in
others. That's what you have to practice.
You have to be able to do that. And
when living with people, the best thing
for us to do is not to talk about their faults,
right? If you point out someone's faults,
they'll make even worse mistakes next time because they
already have those faults in their storehouse. If you point them out
once, they'll give you their whole storehouse.
That's the experience, so don't
talk about their faults when you're not their
teacher. Do you understand? Say
good things to inspire
good things in them.
Only when you're a teacher or a
doctor can you point out their faults. If you're on
equal footing, avoid talking about
other people's mistakes. If
something is worth overlooking, just overlook it;
don't mention it, pretend you didn't see,
hear, or
know it.  Just bring out their good qualities,
and eventually they will become good;
it's very simple. That's
our protective armor. But when
we are surrounded by
ignorant people, we
study from morning till night without achieving anything.
Naturally, we get stressed,
right? Instead, we should think like
this: "How did you do today? You've
improved compared to yesterday! Keep going!" Isn't that a
happy feeling? And if you're
working alongside someone who's ignorant, you should
gradually support them. If they fail,
say, "It's okay, learning involves failure, it's not a
problem. Try again, keep going, whether it's good or not is a
good thing. Teaching people like that is the only way to
succeed. And what about arrogant people? If they
call you stupid, what do you have to do?
If they call you stupid and you do
n't think you're stupid, but they've already
said you are, then you have to admit you're
stupid. They will teach you, right? There's no need to
compete over who's smart.
Naturally, they will change their way of
thinking, right? It's just a
matter of how you approach it, how you
behave, and people will know.
People are asking what the next sentence
will be, so we have to shift our perspective and
change their mindset,
right?
That's the
flexibility in our behavior, and all
that quick response comes from a quick,
generous heart. Without generosity and
kindness, they won't be able to think clearly or control the
situation. Of
course, in life, there are times when you have to be
firm, but being firm with someone
you know will lead to success, right?
If being firm with someone leads to
failure, then don't be firm.
It depends on the circumstances for us to
have different responses; we can't always
act the same way, right?
That will lead to failure. So,
look at the person and adapt your behavior to
suit them, not
to yourself. We live in this world, and
all our actions
must be appropriate for the world, helping
us
avoid suffering and helping others achieve
positive transformation.
That's the way.  We know how to
behave and truly live. Living
next to ignorant people, living next to intelligent people, living
next to arrogant people is not as scary as living
next to deceitful people,
right?
They say one thing on the outside,
but their hearts are different – ​​that's what's hard to live with.
Living next to arrogant people is
n't difficult. Living next to people who are self-righteous is
n't difficult, but living next to people who are
called hypocritical in the outside world
is
hard. That's what's hard. I
'll share about
that issue when we have a lesson on that topic someday.
[Applause]
Dear fellow practitioners, I am
very happy to see that in
a Dharma discussion session we have
such interaction and sharing.
I hope that from next time we will continue to
develop this. Sometimes, when I
sit and share Dharma with you, it's a
monologue, which is very boring; I'm the only one there, and
no one reacts. So I
really hope we can
share in a concrete and
joyful way, because through
sharing, our minds
can flourish.  Developing the ability to observe,
listen, and think
while listening is very important, so we
will make a lot of progress. It's called
multi-faceted learning. We are asking our fellow
practitioners to dedicate
the merit of this. May we
direct this merit to all
disciples and sentient beings so that they may all
choose to attain Buddhahood.
[Music]
Golden chrysanthemum entwined with oil, even a pig would
n't leave. Golden chrysanthemum, even a pig wouldn't leave.
Golden chrysanthemum club, club of a hundred practitioners, rich and poor, even if there are
difficulties, we will not give up. We will not
give up. Even if there are difficulties, we will overcome them.
Golden chrysanthemum club, club of joyful
practice of the Six Harmonies. Golden chrysanthemum club,
club of joyful practice of the Six
Harmonies. One body, one action, two mouths, one mind, one thoughts, one thoughts, one views, one understanding. Six Benefits,
where there are six harmonies, there is joy. Where there is
six harmonies, there is liberation.
[Music]
Liberation, club of the Golden Chrysanthemum, club of peace.
Joyful practice of Buddhist Dharma, Six Harmonies Club,
Golden Chrysanthemum Club, joyful club, together fulfilling our duties,
Golden Chrysanthemum Club,
joyful club, together practicing faith, C
[music]
Cultivating Bodhi Mind, protecting the Three Jewels, spreading
Buddhist teachings throughout the world
[music]
Golden chrysanthemum entwined, the color of the flower, long-lasting
liberation, Golden Chrysanthemum Club, practicing, seeking
liberation, helping everyone,
Golden Chrysanthemum Club, joyful club, cultivating the mind, seeking
liberation, Golden Chrysanthemum Club,
joyful club, club of worship, and those who practice
Buddhism at Ba
Vang Pagoda, always together praying
to seek
supreme compassion, always together
believing to
seek
freedom from suffering
[music]
Golden chrysanthemum entwined, rich, even pigs will
not leave, the golden chrysanthemum is pure and noble,
even pigs are not a
color, Golden Chrysanthemum Club, club of diligent practice, rich and difficult,
even if there are difficulties, we will
not be discouraged, rich and difficult,
even if there are difficulties, we will overcome them, we will overcome them,
Golden Chrysanthemum Club, joyful club, practicing
Buddhist Dharma  The Six Harmonies Club, the Golden Chrysanthemum
Club, a joyful Buddhist practice club. The Six Harmonies Club, one body,
one pillar, two mouths, three minds, one mind, one thoughts, one mind, one practice, five precepts, one practice, five understanding, one liberation,
six words of the
flower,
where there is the
Six Harmonies, there is peace and
joy, where one practices the Six Harmonies, there is liberation.
[Music] The Golden Chrysanthemum Club, a joyful Buddhist practice club. The Six Harmonies Club, the Golden Chrysanthemum Club, a joyful club, together fulfilling our duties. The Golden Chrysanthemum Club, a joyful club, together cultivating love and compassion. [Music]
The love of cultivating Bodhi Mind, protecting the Three Jewels,
spreading Buddhist teachings throughout the
world. The golden chrysanthemum, the noble flower, the color of
liberation. The Golden Chrysanthemum
Club, practicing to seek liberation, helping everyone. The Golden Chrysanthemum Club, a
joyful club, practicing to seek liberation. The Golden Chrysanthemum Club, a
joyful club, the club of offerings, and the
Buddhist practitioners at Ba
Vang Temple, always together in love
to pray for freedom from
suffering. Always together in love
to
pray for
freedom from suffering.
[Music]
Golden Chrysanthemum  Wrapped in rich words, even pigs
don't leave the golden chrysanthemum, high sorrow,
even pigs aren't the
color of the sentence, the
golden
chrysanthemum club, the hundred-cultivation club, even if it's difficult, even if it's difficult, C won't give up, even if it's difficult, C will overcome, even if it's difficult, C will overcome, the golden
chrysanthemum club, the joyful
club, practicing Buddhist Six Harmonies, the
golden chrysanthemum club, the joyful
club, practicing Buddhist Six Harmonies, one body, one body, one mind ...
Golden Club of Joyful Practice and
Prayer for Liberation Golden Chrysanthemum Club Golden
Club of Joyful Practice Golden Chrysanthemum Club
[Music]
Joyful Club of Offerings and
Buddhist practitioners at Ba
Vang Temple always together in love to
pray for freedom from
suffering always together in love
to
pray for
freedom from suffering
[Music] [
Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
Pain